# Book Review : Counterfeit Gods

## What drives you?

Some people are driven by money. Others by success, family, religion, or a whole
host of other noble and good things.

But what *really* drives you? There are likely deeper, more foundational
motivations behind the decisions you make, the image you portray on social
media, and the trajectory you set your life to achieve.

For example, many people want to have money. Why? What they are really after
isn't a pile of green paper, it's the *control* it brings to live a life of
comfort. To be in control of your financial situation.

Counterfeit Gods examines common outward (money, love, family) idols and inward
idols (success, power, control) and concludes that all these earthly idols do
not fulfill the true desires of your heart. Only Jesus Christ can you find true
peace and fulfillment.

The truth is we all worship something. Something gets us out of bed in the
morning, controls our inner voice, and pushes us to strive in life. Money, jobs,
kids, hobbies, celebrities, comfort, happiness, and the list goes on.Â 

Everyone is driven by something. Everyone has an idol.

Counterfeit Gods is a book from Pastor Tim Keller on idols. Keller examines
common worldly idols, concluding that the only true idol that matters is Jesus
Christ.


## Introduction

### The Setting

Counterfeit Gods was written in 2009, during the heart of the financial collapse
and US recession. Tim Keller, the author, is the pastor of Redeemer Presbyterian
Church in Manhattan. Redeemer is one, if not the, largest church in New York
City. He's a remarkable preacher, writer. The story of Keller and Redeemer is
amazing, but for another time.

It's important to understand the climate under which this book was written. In
2009, the United States was in a rather deep recession. The financial markets
were falling, the mortgage industry was being exposed for fraud, and the economy
was in a recession. Keller was in the heart of that. Preaching to the very
people on Wall Street and New York's financial district who's lives were being
devastated.

What a great opportunity for this book to bring hope to those in despair. While
this book's message is timeless, we can't ignore the circumstances or
underestimate the need for hope during those challenging times.

### Idols

> What are idols?

Keller begins the book by defining idols. Keller defines an idol as:

> Anything more important to you than God. Anything that absorbs your heart and
> imagniation more than God, anything you seek to give you what only God can
> give.

If we take Christianity out of it, an idol is the thing that drives your life.
Everyone has an idol. Everyone worships *something*.

Idols can be outward facing. Like money, sex, or drugs. But idols take many
other forms. "Inner" idols are extremely powerful thoughts and feelings we
value. Examples include, respect, power, status, control, greed, and comfort.
All of these idols operate inside our minds but ultimately drive our lives.

It's important to understand that idols are not just "bad" things. Things
typically seen as "good" can be turned into idols. Work, success, family, even
religion itself, can be an idol. Anything can be an idol. In fact, the "good"
things in life can become most sinister and deepest idols.

Why do we have idols? Idols give us security. A sense of fulfillment and
purpose. We put our hope and faith in them because they fulfill our dreams and
desires.

A common theme in the book is that even things that bring you joy in life will
be ruined if they become idols. For example, it's natural for people to want the
best for their children and to protect them. But taken to an extreme, by not
letting your kids fail, you could destroy their self worth and confidence. If a
child doesn't know what it's like to fail, they may go through life with the
fear of failure. They won't know how to respond if they lose their job, or how
to act when they are wronged in life.

Idols typically start with something which at the core is healthy. Wanting to be
successful, for example, is noble and pure. We should strive to be successful in
life. It's when taken to an extreme, when success becomes an idol, that it
destroys you. Perhaps you start working 80 hour weeks. Take on multiple side
projects. Step on others to get ahead. Get involved in groups. Focus your life
on work. If you've made success an idol, you'll do whatever it takes to be
successful.

### Recognizing Idols

How do you recognize idols in your life? After all, everyone needs money. Isn't
it natural that we work hard to become successful? The world is ultra
competitive, isn't it not only good but essential to work hard and compete?
Isn't spending time with family and loving your kids important?

Of course they are. But aren't they also common idols? So what makes something
an idol?

Things become idols when they control our lives. When we become depressed or paralyzed in fear thinking about losing them.
What are you afraid of? What if the stock market crashed and your investments
were worthless? Would your life be ruined if you lost your job? What if your
wife left you? Idols lie at the heart of your deepest fears.

Another way to tell if something has become an idol is to look at where you
spend your resources. Where do you spend time and money? What do you think about
when you have free time? Those areas of your life are where you start to realize
your idols. Where your treasure is, your heart will be also.

## Idols

After defining idolatry and recognizing idols, Countefeit Gods examines common
idols and provides examples of how all things, even "good" things, become idols.

### Happiness

Everyone wants to be happy. Exactly what being happy means is different for
everyone - after all everyone has different idols. But ultimately, everyone
wants to be happy. How we define happiness is how we prioritize our lives.

Keller gives multiple eamples of how people idolize things with the ultimate
goal to be happy. People become workaholics because it makes them feel better
about their lives - how they are better than others. We spend hours at the gym
to be attractive, good looking, and thin. Being good looking gives us
confidence. We idolize about how we look and what other people think of us.

Keller concludes that all idols ultimately fall short of true happiness. If the
workaholic loses his job, or the attractive people gain weight, they are
devistated. Their self worth is depenedent on their idol.

### Idols

Counterfeit Gods walks thru common idols and gives examples of people who have
ruined their lives by idolizing each. Keller, thru his misistry, has powerful
stories of people who have ruined their lives by placing these things at the
center of their life's purpose:

### Sex

Sex is a very prominent idol. It's disheartening to say, but the porn industry
is a $1 trillion, growing industry. Why? People idolize sex. Our culture
promotes sex. Apps exist to foster one night stands. Sex itself is not evil.
After all, it is a gift given to us by God himself. But when sex is idolized, it
turns into sin.

### Love

It is natural for us to love others. For example, I love my children dearly. But
what happens when we idolize our children? We watch over them, protect them. We
don't want to see them fail, so we intervene in their lives and guard them from
failure. We helicopter parent.

What we don't realize, is our love for our children can ruin them. They become
dependent on us. If they've never experienced failure as a child, they won't
know how to handle it as an adult.

### Money

Money is a huge idol in people's lives. Wanting money or success is not an idol.
But if you define your life by how much money you make, or prioritize money over
all else, you'll never be satisfied. There will always be someone with more.

How do you know you idolize money? Does your retirement account give you
comfort? If you lost it all today, would you fall into deep depression or
despair?

### Success

> Achievement is the alcohol of our time.

We live in an ultra competitive world. We need to work harder than ever before
to remain competitive. For some, the desire for success - to be the best - gives
them confidence and power. The more success we have, the more we want and the
less meaningful it becomes.

If you are tempted by power and success, even if you are not religious, look at
the life of Jesus. Jesus had the ultimate power. He raised people from the dead,
cured illness, and performed miracles. He had the power to do anything. Yet he
was a servant, a teacher. He sacrificed his life for the sins we commit.

Interestingly, today's most successful leaders are humble, show empathy, and
focus on doing good for humanity. They model Jesus. 2000 years ago Jesus showed
us the ultimate example of leadership. Studying Jesus, understanding how He
worked, how He thought, what He valued, how He treated people, will give you the
mindset and toolset for success.

### Power

> The way down is to go up, the way up is to go down. Always be humble.

A close cousin to success is power. We want to be in control of our lives, to
have power and influence. In the end, power gives you a false sense of security.

Power is fleeting. One day you have it, the next you could lose it. What is
interesting is that those in power tend to live in fear and anxiety about it.
They have more to lose. As you make more money in a company, or have the power
to influence large budgets or groups of people, you have a lot more focus on
your decisions. If you let it, you could end up in fear.

Power is not just a personal idol. It's also a cultural idol. Nations strive for
power. National pride can lead to prejudice. To believe you are "better" than
someone else. Pride leads to distruction, war, and a loss for humanity.

### Hidden idols

There are "hidden" idols in our lives that the book calls out. Some of them are
personal idols, some are "corporate" idols.

Corporations idolize profits over people. It ultimately causes them ruin, but
they do it anyway. It causes them to be unethical and brutal to people.

Cultures have idols. Today's cultural idol is "self". America was founded under
the belief and fear of God. Over time, culture shifted from idolizing God to
idolizing the country itself. Today, we idolize individualism and being
"yourself".

Religion itself can be an idol. Religion can become toxic. People who think they
are "better" than others turn people off to religion. Some people focus their
lives around doing "church things" - being involved in small groups, leading
Bible studies, events, being involved in prayer teams, etc. You can make
religion itself an idol.

## Replacing your idols

We all idolize something. We cannot simply remove idols, we must replace them.
We have to live for something in our lives. The question isâ-âwhat are we going
to live for?

How do we identify our idols? Think about where you spend your time, money, and
attention.

* What occupies your mind when you have nothing to think about?
* What do you habitually think about which gives you comfort, confidence, and strength?
* Where do you spend your time and money?
* What are you the most afraid of?

Keller concludes that true fulfillment can only come thru Jesus Christ. All
earthly idols will ultimately disappoint. It is God's love for us that He sent
Jesus to die for our sins.

Keller tells us to set our hearts on Jesus. To put to death what belongs to your
earthly nature - sexual impurity, lust, evil desires greed, and other earthly
idols. When we truly set our hearts and minds on Jesus, we become free. Jesus
paid the ultimate price for our sin and by loving and following Him, we have an
eterminty in heaven.

And that is the ultimate comfort and fulfillment for our lives.
