# Make Work Meaningful, Less Stressful, and More Rewarding

* Image

> Every Good Endeavor examines the Biblical origins of work, the problems we
> have with work, and how powerful mindset is to make work meaningful,
> fullfilling, less stressful, and ultimately more rewarding.

Work is an increasingly important and demanding part of our lives. We spend more
waking hours of our lives working than we do with our spouses, families, or our
hobbies. Work forms our identity, is a source of pride and accomplishment, and 
for most, a primary source of income. Test 



But how often do you step back and put work into perspective? What role does
work have in your life? Why are you working so hard? What are your life goals
and what role does work contribute to those goals? When we die and look back on
our lives, what will we think of our work - the jobs we did, the people we met,
the struggles we overcame, the successes, the failures, and how we treated
people?

This post started, and still is, as a book review of Every Good Endeavor by Tim
Keller. As part of researching for this post, I gathered information on the
current state of work. I'm going to start by discussing what I found before
moving into the review. While we all have our personal view on work, our jobs
and feelings, I feel it helps to understand at a broad level the culture and
state of work in the world today.

## Current State of Work

Culture

I'm American, so I'll pick on American culture. American culture and society
idolizes hard work, dedication, entrepreneurship, risk taking, money, and
success. It's hardwired into our minds early on. We tell our kids they can do
anything they want if they set their mind to it and work hard. We idolize people
like Steve Jobs and Elon Musk who have literally given their lives for their
companies.

A work driven culture is not unique to America. China prides themselves on "996"
work schedules and demanding environments. 996 is unhealthy and insane - working
9AM to 9PM 6 days a week. China is also extremely ambitious. Their public goal
is to dominate technology and AI in the coming decade, making China the world
leader in advanced technology. Given their ambition, track record, size,and
resources, they will definitely be a leader.

We have an increasingly "always on" expectation. Work for many doesn't stop when
they get home. Technology has allowed us to take work with us - and increasingly
we do. We check our calendars when we wake up, email around the clock, and never
turn our minds off. As work has gone global it's become a 24-7 operation - there
is no downtime.

In America, and increasingly around the world, work is idolized. Work has become
our source of identity, of confidence, of control, and of self-worth. Life for
many people *is* work. It *is* how we identity ourselves with the world. 

With this type of work driven culture, it's easy to see why people struggle
finding "work / life balance". The culture doesn't value balance - it values
work. I do feel it's changing - companies are prioritizing balance and having
better expectations around schedules.

Identity

Regardless of what field you're in, you're known largely by your work. "He's a
doctor", "She's a lawyer", "He's an engineer". The truth is work *is* a large
part of our identity. And we work hard to build and shape that identity.

Consider LinkedIn. People spend countless hours forming and crafting their
LinkedIn profile, posting messages to reflect their values, their ideal image.
The things we post, like, comment on, and promote help shape the image we want
to portray. And judging by the growth of social media, we work hard at shaping
our image.

People post about how successful they are, how hard they've worked, the struggle
and pain they are going thru because of how dedicated and driven they are, how
great their company is, how being an entrepreneur and following your dream is
the key to success, how much my company values equality, diversity, ethics, etc.

From the outside, it appears people are successful, love their their jobs, their
companies, their accomplishments, and want people to know it. 

Anxiety

Inwardly, a different story is playing out. The American Psychiatric Association
(APA) claims that 40 million Americans, about 18% (1 in 5), have an anxiety
disorder. That's over double the world average. According to the World Health
Organization, 1 in 13 worldwide suffer from anxiety disorders. Still a high
number, but America is much higher than the world average. 

Why? Why are Americans so much more anxious and depressed? What are they anxious
about? While people are anxious about many different things, money and work are
numbers one and two - in that order. 

So while outwardly people love their jobs, the reality is work is one of the
leading forms of anxiety. And honestly, given the cultural importance we put on
work, success, "hustle", drive, etc, it's easy to see why. Money and work have
become cultural idols.

Keller calls worry, anxiety, and the need to self-promote yourself "the work
under the work". It's a catchy, memorable phrase but it carries a lot of truth.
His point is worrying itself is hard work. It consumes time, energy, and stress
which could be better directed at doing actual work. Now not only do we have a
job, we have a second job worrying about our job. How ironic.


## Need for Perspective, Mindset

Like anything in life, too much of a good thing is not healthy. We need to put
work into perspective, into the broader context of life. Work is important and
we were made to do it, but I hope we agree it's not the primary goal of our
lives.

Perspective and mindset is the key to a healthy relationship with work. That is
the focus of Every Good Endeavor. Let's dive into the book.

## Every Good Endeavor - Introduction

Every Good Endeavor, by Christian pastor Tim Keller, examines the history, the
troubles, and mindset we should have toward work. Regardless if you are a
Christian or not, the history and perspective Keller brings will allow you to
examine how *you* view work, your mindset, and make you think about how you want
to change your mindset towards work. It puts work into perspective.

Tim Keller is a Christian pastor and founder of Redeemer Presbyterian Church in
New York City. He's an approachable, down to earth speaker and writer who
approaches Christianity from a skeptical point of view. He makes Christianity
approachable and understandable, avoiding complicated or overly religious tones
in favor of practical, bible based principles and teachings that have "down to
earth" appeal. He speaks directly to people's lives with the goal to generally
help, not an attempt to promote religion. He presents the facts, the Biblical
point of view, but ultimately leaves it to the reader to decide their truth.
In my opinion, his style is extremely effective.

You most certainly do *not* need to be a Christian to grow from this book. In
fact, the Christian mindset and values described in Every Good Endeavor are at
work and practiced, many times better, by non-Christians than they are by
Christians themselves. Regardless if or what religion you hold, the Christian
mindset towards work gives you another perspective from which you can pull ideas
from to shape your own mindset and perspective.

The book is broken up into three sections:

1. The origins of work
2. The problems with work
3. The mindset we should have toward work

## Part 1: God's Plan for Work (The Origins of Work)

God Designed Work

Where does work come from? The book starts off with the Biblical origin of work.
Work was created by God. God himself worked. He created the heavens and earth,
man and woman, all creation. Because we were created in God's image, and God
worked, we also work. 

Regardless of *how* work came into existence, we all realize work is a basic
human need that we have. We need to work. It gives us a sense of accomplishment,
of pride, and meaning in our lives. If we didn't have "a job", we would have to
do something with our time. Consider the person who dreamed of retiring. But
after a few months in retirement, boredom sets in. Humans weren't made to sit
and do nothing.

So why do many people *not* enjoy work? Why is work stressful? Why do we
struggle with work related anxiety?

The Bible tells us that work was not designed to be toilsome labor. However
after Adam and Eve disobeyed God, sin entered the world. As part of this great
fall, work became difficult. Jobs became "work" in the toil sense, which is not
what God originally intended. He intended for us to enjoy our work, as He
enjoyed work. He designed work to be a source of happiness, fulfillment and
pride as it was for God himself.

God also rested, so should we. We must stop to enjoy the work we have done. That
is part of life. We live in a world which craves affirmation. It's easy to be a
workaholic, but we need to put limits on our work.

All Work Has Dignity

By many cultures, work was viewed as demeaning. Even today, many look down on
"low class" jobs, giving more respect to the CEO than the janitor.

The Bible tells us that God does not look down on anyone. Case in point: Jesus.
Jesus was a carpenter. Not a CEO or position demanding high organizational
authority.

The lesson here is to not look down on anyone. Respect those who clean the
floors as much as the CEO. All work has dignity the way God designed it.

Work as a Service

How to you measure success in the work you do? For many, it's by the size of the
paycheck. For others, it's about the respect you're given from others. For some,
it's about helping others.

Keller makes a point thru the book which I feel is powerful for us to reflect on
as we change our mindset toward work. Work should be a calling, not a vocation.
Work should be something that we do for others, not ourselves. Work only becomes
a calling if you do it for something bigger than yourself. It's here, in serving
others, that you find the most fulfillment, joy, and sense of accomplishment
from your work.

Today's companies have realized that purpose and mission are more impactful than
money and profits. People want to work for a mission, a cause, that is bigger
than themselves. For example, Satya Nadella is executing one of the most
successful corporate turnarounds in history by focusing on purpose, mission, and
empathy in how he leads Microsoft. Companies are increasingly priding themselves
on their ethics, values, and generosity. They've also realized that what's good
for people is also good for business. And that's good for everyone.

Christian Beliefs

For Christians, Keller reminds us that we are saved by faith, not works. Jesus
came to save us, our battle has already been won. You can rest assured in your
work that regardless of how successful or not you are, you can't be more saved
than you are today. Knowing that, there is no reason to be anxious or worry
about work or money. Be humbly confident in your work.

Also, Christians realize that God provides work and we are working for Him. Only
your best will do. Christians should do their absolute best work, never cutting
corners or being unethical, knowing they are working for God, not man.

## Part 2: The Problems With Work

In this section of the book, Keller lays out problems with work. 

Work Becomes Fruitless

Why is work hard? The Bible tells us it's because of sin. Sin permeates all
aspects of our lives, including our work. We will experience pain, envy,
conflict, frustration, and fatigue.

Work Becomes Pointless

The Bible is full of stories about how kings, who had everything they wanted on
earth, set out to find meaning in life. They tried to learn everything, spend
all their time on pleasure, and accumulate great wealth. Their conclusion was
even when they accomplished their goals, it didn't give them a meaningful life.

The only way to have a meaningful life is to work for others. Working for things
of this world is pointless. We can't take them with us when we die.

The Bible also gives us wisdom as to how to make work meaningful:

* Choose work that fits your gifts. Take an honest inventory of what makes you
  great, where you fit, and choose work accordingly. It may mean taking less
  money or status, but ultimately you'll find more fulfillment.

* Choose work that benefits others. Watch out for unethical people and
  companies.

* Work to benefit your field. Make your industry better for the next generation.
  
Work Becomes Selfish

We've mentioned earlier how much more meaningful and impactful purpose and
mission are to job satisfaction and how companies are figuring that out.

Still, for many, work is about themselves. Our jobs become our source of pride,
power, and security. This leads to competition, envy, struggle, and ultimately
idolizing work.

In the Christian world view, everything you have has been given to you by God.
The country you were born in, the opportunities you have, the money you've made,
the people you come in contact with, your drive and ambition. Everything comes
from God. Christians should possess a humbleness and appreciation for everything
they have and should not set their sights on selfish motives.


## Part 3: The Mindset We Should Have Toward Work

Part 3 is all about mindset. This is where the book became really valuable to me
personally. I'm a big believer in power of mindset. I feel the mindset you have
controls your actions, your thoughts, your success, and your happiness. If you
want to change your views on life, control stress, run a marathon, start a
company, it all comes down to your mindset. Carol Dweck's popular book
[mindset](https://www.amazon.com/Mindset-Psychology-Carol-S-Dweck/dp/0345472322)
is a good starting point towards understanding the power of mindset if you're
intereseted in learning more about the subject.

Whether you realize it or not, you have a mindset. If you don't take away
anything else from this blog post, I really hope you spend the time examining
your mindset. Not just regarding work, but your mindset towards life. Here,
we'll just talk about work, but mindset controls everything you do.

So, what should our mindset be to have meaningful, productive, and rewarding
work? There is no right or wrong answer. It ultimately depends on your values,
your "North Star". Do you value power and authority, wanting to climb a
corporate ladder? Are you grateful for your work, or do you feel the company
owes you something? 

Keller lays out the Christian mindset:

* Be grateful for what you have, in any situation. Regardless if you are rich,
  poor, employed, or unemployed - be thankful.
* Love others. People are the most important thing on this planet. Take care of
  people.
* Do exceptional work. Don't cut corners. Only the best will do. Your work
  should be honoring to God.
* Work hard, but do not idolize work. Have perspective.
* Work should be your "calling", not a vocation.
* Work is not about money. 
* Do not worry. Our place in heaven, with God, is secured thru the death of
  Jesus. By grace, we have been saved. Our battle has been won. We can work in
  humble confidence knowing that God will provide.


## Case Study: AI and Kai-Fu Lee

I bet you didn't expect a book review about work and Christianity to be related
to AI. Neither did I. But as it turns out, AI is highly relevant to the
discussion on work and perspective. 

AI is literally transforming the world. Law, logistics, medicine, agriculture,
manufacturing, there are very few industries which will not be revolutionized by
AI. AI is advancing humanity at an amazing pace. AI showcases the best of what
can be accomplished thru work.

Unfortunately, AI also showcases the worst of work. Those in AI work extremely
long hours and give their lives to their work. 

I watched an excellent [TED talk]() by Kai-Fu Lee titled "How AI can save our
humanity" which literally opened my eyes to how powerful of an idol work has
become. Kai-Fu is a world leading AI researcher. He dedicated his life to AI,
working insane hours and priding himself on his work accomplishments.

Until Lee was diagnosed with cancer, which led him to profound reflection around
work. He researched death and specifically the regrets of the dying. He found
that those dying regretted not spending enough time with their family and
spreading love to others. Nobody regretted not working longer hours.

Lee's cancer went into remission. Lee reprioritized his life and mindset toward
work. He reduced his work hours and prioritizes family over work. He also
realized that humans have something that AI doesn't - love and compassion. He
concluded that AI has the potential to allow humans to focus on work serving
others. Elderly care, teaching, mental health are all job growth areas.

What Lee found is similar to what Keller discusses in his book. That the path to
work fulfillment is thru serving others and working for something bigger than
yourself. That in the end, meaningful life is about loving others.


## Final Thoughts

For me, Every Good Endeavor put work into perspective. I struggled with work for
20 years. I have fallen into the trap of working around the clock, taking on too
many side projects, spending countless hours trying to learn every technology
imaginable, worrying that I'm not keeping up with others, losing my job, not
being able to support my family, you name it.

But after years of iodolizing work, I'm starting to realize it needs to be put
into perspective. I'm not famous like Kai-Fu Lee, worked nearly as long or hard
as he has, but I'm going thru a similar perspective shift that he did. I realize
now that work has meaning and value, but it doesn't define me as a person. Time
with family is more important than work. And serving others is more meaningful
than serving ourselves.

I also reevaluated my mindset, being much more grateful and content with what I
have today, not what I could have if the current project I'm working on or
company I'm building is successful.

As a Christian, I appreciated Keller's reminder that there is no need to worry.
God is in control. I have the confidence and strength to face any trial that
comes my way.

Does putting work into perspective mean I'm going to slow down? Not a chance.
Setting boundaries on work allows me to clearly focus on work when I'm working,
clearly focus on life when I'm not. Boundaries around work are necessary and
healthy. I'm much less worried and much more productive both at work and at
home. Which is good, because I have a lot of things to learn and a lot of code
to write.

Hopefully this review prompts you to reflect on the role of work in your life.
We spend so much time working, we owe it to ourselves to reflect, reset, adjust,
set goals and plan to make work meaningful, fulfilling, less stressful, and
ultimately more rewarding.

## Bibliography

[A Lot of Americans Are More Anxious Than They Were Last Year, a New Poll  Says](http://time.com/5269371/americans-anxiety-poll/)

A very small (1000 person) survey from the American Psychiatric Associated which
concluded 40% of Americans are more anxious today (2018) than last year. What is
interesting is the "future of the nation" is one of the largest causes of stress
and anxiety. Anxiety about work was not directly asked in the survey, but
"paying my bills" was high on the list - definitely work related.

[Understanding Anxiety](https://adaa.org/understanding-anxiety)

Facts on statistics which reveal that 18% of Americans (40 million people)
suffer an anxiety disorder in any given year.

* [Work has me Crippled with Anxiety. Is it Time to Quit?](https://medium.com/the-mission/im-so-anxious-at-work-is-it-time-to-quit-82009f0d36b1)

Explains how prevalent work related anxiety is and the irony of people who make
more money are among the least happy, most anxious. Offers bland advice on how
to not be anxious: talk with your boss, quit, or do nothing.

The framing of anxiety and statistics around anxiety in this article is good.
The guidance around how to address anxiety doesn't get to the heart of the
problem - chaninging your mindset.


[How AI can save our humanity](https://www.ted.com/talks/kai_fu_lee_how_ai_can_save_our_humanity?language=en#t-624930)

An absolutely excellent talk from Kai-Fu Lee, a world leading AI researcher. Lee discusses
how advances in AI are going to replace, auguemnt, and create jobs in different
sectors.

Lee was diagnosed with cancer, which led him to profound reflection around work.
He realized how foolish it was to base his life around his work accomplishments.
He reprioritized his life, putting his family first.

He examined death and researched the regrets of the dying. Those dying retretted
not spending enough time with their family and spreading love with others. 

He concluded that AI has no love. AI will take away routine jobs, it will create
jobs which show love and compassion to others. 

Definitely watch this video if you are interested in work.