# Counterfeit Gods

Which brings us to the core of Counterfeit Gods. The deep desires which drive
our lives, our thoughts, our actions, our feelings, and our resolutions, are our
idols. Idols motivate us, they encourage us, they are the lens thru which we
view life, ourselves, determine what we values, our political beliefs, and where
we spend our time, money, and passion.

As you read this review, I encourage you to honestly challenge yourself. What are
your deepest idols? What motivates you to act and value what you do? What, if
anything, do you need to change in your life?

Another common but effective thought process is to start with the end in mind.
When you die, how do you want to be remembered? As skinny? Rich? Someone who had
a lot of hobbies? As someone who gave themselves to others? As a mentor or
teacher?


With that introduction out of the way, let's dive into Counterfeit Gods.

---

## Introduction

Everyone has idols. Idols guide our thoughts, decisions, actions, goals, values,
and ultimatly, our lives. Counterfeit Gods examines these common idols,
concluding that the idols which drive so many people - money, love, power,
control, respect, and so on, are ultimately unfulfilling. The only true idol
that will fulfill our deepest desires is God. Because we are born sinners, we
need to set our hearts and minds on Jesus Christ.

Counterfeit Gods was written in 2009, during the heart of the financial collapse
and US recession. Definitely timely for a book like this given how important
money is to so many people.

An idol is what you value in your heart. Anything can be an idol. Some things
were are seen as "bad" or "outward" idols are money, sex, drugs, or self image.
But idols are not just "bad" things. Even things typically seen as good and
noble can be idols. Work, success, family, even religion itself, can be an idol.
Anything can be an idol. In fact, the most prominent idols are the ones closest
to our hearts and minds - like success, power, control, or authority. They can't
be seen, but they underlie many of the deepest desires we have.

We love, trust, and put our faith in our idols. Idols give us security. A sense
of fulfillment and purpose, They control our lives.

How do you something is an idol in your life? Do you live in fear of it? Are you
afraid of what will happen if you lost all your money? Would your life be ruined
if you lost your job?if you live in fear about something, chances are it's an
idol.

### Happiness

Everyone wants to be happy. We live our lives to make our dreams come true.
Exactly what being happy means is different for everyone - after all everyone
has different idols. But ultimately, everyone wants to be happy.

Keller gives multiple eamples of how people idolize things with the ultimate
goal to be happy. People become workaholics because it makes them feel better
about their lives - how they are better than others. We spend hours at the gym
to be attractive, good looking, and thin. Being good looking gives us
confidence.

A common theme in the book is that even things that bring you joy in life will
be ruined if they beocme idols. For example, it's natural for people to want the
best for their children and to protect them. But taken to an extreme, by not
letting your kids fail, you could destroy their self worth and confidence. If a
child doesn't know what it's like to fail, they may go through life with the
fear of failure. They won't know how to respond if they lose their job, or how
to act when they are wronged in life.

### Sex and Love

Securlar society durns to sex and romance to give them a sense of meaning.
It's sad to say, but the porn industry is massive and growing. Why? People
idolize sex. Love can become an idol too. Any person you put above God in your
life is an idol. Keller tells the story of Jacob from the Bible. Jacob lusted
after a woman named Rachel for her beauty. Ultimately, it ruined his life.



## Everyone has an idol

## What are common idols?

### Physical idols

### "Deep" idols

## Choosing your idols

* Start with the end. How do you want your life remembered?
* Average life won't be remembered in 2 generations.


## Replacing your idols

##