# Book Review: Creative Selection: Inside Apple's Design Process During the Golden Age of Steve Jobs

[Image]

## Background

Creative Selection, written by Ken Kocienda, describes Apple's culture and
development process under Steve Jobs. This culture created products like the
Safari, iPod, iPhone, and iPad.

Ken Kocienda was a long time software engineer with a deep history of working
with and around Apple people. After the Mac was released, some of the core Mac
engineers left Apple to start Easel - a software company which built tools on
top of GNOME. Ken worked for Easel, then was hired at Apple to work on Safari
with Don Melton - who he worked with at Easel. Ken and Don were the first two
Safari engineers.

After Safari, Ken went to work on the iPhone. He wrote the original iPhone
keyboard, gestures, and other core iOS features.

## What is Creative Selection?

Creative Selection is certainly not a technology book. It's a playbook on the
culture and mindset behind one, if not the, world's most successful product
company. Apple makes technical products, but the lessons here apply to any
company, period. You could be making paper, shoes, food, toys, games, it doesn't
matter. All product companies could stand to take lessons from Apple.

Interestingly, after Steve Jobs died, Tim Cook claimed that Jobs' greatest
gift to humanity, his best "product", was Apple itself. The culture. The "DNA"
that makes up Apple. Culture is *everything* to a company. To read about the
culture of Apple was the most valuable piece of the book.

You, like I, may be wondering what the term "Creative Selection" means. It's the
term Kocienda used to describe Apple's product culture. Like Darwinian "Natural
Selection", Apple's "Creative Selection" continually refines it's product
creation ethos, it's cultural drive to perfection over time.

Kocienda describes Apple's "Creative Selection" as the interplay between several
core values. The core values of "Creative Selection" (and Apple) include:

* Inspiration
* Craft
* Collaboration
* Diligence
* Decisiveness
* Taste
* Empathy

After the inital backdrop of Apple's culture, the book transitioned into stories
ranging from Safari, to the iOS keyboard, working with Steve Jobs, Scott
Forstall, and ultimately shipping the iPhone.

While I thought the stories were great, I thought Ken's vivid (sometimes a bit
over dramatic) description of Apple's culture was excellent. I felt like I was
actually in the meetings with Steve Jobs and could feel the frustrations he had
as an engineer working towards delivering a product, like a virtual keyboard,
which had never been developed for a mainstream consumer audience at scale
before.

He certainly painted Apple under a mostly positive light. He didn't try to make
Steve or Apple out to be perfect, but the tone felt a little overly positive
towards the company, people, and process. I have to imagine that the burnout and
pain that went on during the development of the iPhone was real. It had to have
been a demanding and brutal place to be at times. While there was *some* of that
discussed in the book, I feel like reality was probably more harsh than what was
mentioned in the book. It would have been interesting to have him address
the effects of Steve's and Apple's demanding side a bit more.

## Demos

During the opening of the book, to draw the reader in, Ken describes a big
demo he had with Steve to show the iPhone keyboard. He used the demo to describe
Apple's demanding drive for perfection, it's mindset towards excellence and
attention to detail. As he describes, It was hard to work and please Steve.

The way Apple runs meetings is something all of us can learn from. Each meeting
had a decider. Meetings were kept efficient, minimal, and focused. You could
tell they were pragmatic and didn't waste time with a bunch of powerpoint, fake
demos or clutter.

Decisions during demos were made around Apple's core values. Steve pushed for
simplicity and making tech simple for people to use. Apple has always been known
for making technology approachable - Ken's inside stories reinforce how core
those beliefs are enforced down to the meeting level.

## Closed, Secretive Culture

What I still find interesting is that Apple hardware and software development
during the Safari and iPhone days was the opposite of open. While the world
moved towards open source first, Apple clearly did not. I would really like to
know if Swift and other OSS projects at Apple have changed their stance.

Even when describing Safari, which is based on the GPL'd KHTML, Apple had a
closed mindset. They wanted to make Safari as closed as possible but still
complying with the GPL.

## Safari

Ken was brought into Apple to build Safari. They initially tried to base it on
Mozilla, since Don Melton worked for Mozilla, but they couldn't pull it off. The
mozilla codebase was too complex. Richard Williamson was hired and quickly stood
up a working version of KHTML running on the Mac. Which ended up being their
basis for Safari.

Ken learned to move quick, cut your losses early, and that knowing people are
more valuable than engineering.

Ken compared Apple's creativity to Edison. Edison paid attention to small
details and drew from the work of others. Also that products often required 1%
inspiration, 99% perspiration.

