# Book Review : Counterfeit Gods

Everyone is driven by something. What you value deep in your heart is your
idol. Some people are driven by money. Others want success. Some live for their
family, or a religion. Counterfeit Gods examines common outward (money, love,
family) idols and inward idols (success, power, control) and concludes that all
idols ultimately do not fulfill the true desires of your heart. Only Jesus
Christ can you find true peace and fulfillment.

We all have idols. Every one of us is driven by something. As you read this
review, I encourage you to examine your heart and life. What are your deepest
idols? What drives you? And be brutally honest with yourself. This is a private
exercise - you don't even need to write anything down (but do it - it helps!).

## Introduction

### The Setting

Counterfeit Gods was written in 2009, during the heart of the financial collapse
and US recession. Tim Keller, the author, is the pastor of Redeemer Presbyterian
Church - one, if not the, largest church in New York City. (He's a remarkable
preacher, writer. The story of Redeemer is a great story for another time.)

Think for a second about when and where this book was written. In 2009, the
United States was in a rather deep recession. The financial markets were
falling, the mortgage industry was essentially being exposed for fraud, and the
market was in tough shape. Keller was in the heart of that. Preaching to the
very people who's lives were being devistated. What a great opportunity for this
book to bring hope to those in despair.

### Idols

Everyone has idols. Idols guide our thoughts, decisions, actions, goals, values,
and ultimatly, our lives. Counterfeit Gods examines these common idols,
concluding that the idols which drive so many people - money, love, power,
control, respect, and so on, are ultimately unfulfilling. The only true idol
that will fulfill our deepest desires is God. Because we are born sinners, we
need to set our hearts and minds on Jesus Christ.

An idol is what you value in your heart. Anything can be an idol. Some idols are
"outward" idols - things you can see. Like  money, sex, drugs, or self image.
Even things typically seen as good and noble can be idols. Work, success,
family, even religion itself, can be an idol. Anything can be an idol. In fact,
the most sinister and deepest idols are those closest to our hearts and minds.
Ssuccess, power, control, or authority. They can't be seen, but they underlie
many of our deepest desires.

We love, trust, and put our faith in our idols. Idols give us security. A sense
of fulfillment and purpose, They control our lives.

A common theme in the book is that even things that bring you joy in life will
be ruined if they become idols. For example, it's natural for people to want the
best for their children and to protect them. But taken to an extreme, by not
letting your kids fail, you could destroy their self worth and confidence. If a
child doesn't know what it's like to fail, they may go through life with the
fear of failure. They won't know how to respond if they lose their job, or how
to act when they are wronged in life.

All idols typically start at something at the core is healthy. Wanting to be
successful is noble and pure. We should strive to be successful in life. It's
when taken to an extreme, when success becomes an idol, that it destroys you.
You work 80 hour weeks. Take on multiple side projects. Get involved in groups.
Focus your life on work. You've made success an idol.

### Recognizing Idols

How do you recognize idols in your life? After all, everyone needs money. Isn't
it natural that we work hard to become successful? The world is ultra
competitive, isn't it not only good but *essential* to work hard and compete?

Nothing in life - sex, money, or success is a bad thing. They become idols when
they control our lives. When we become depressed or paralyzed in fear thinking
about losing them. What are you afraid of? What if the stock market crashed and
your investments were worthless? Would your life be ruined if you lost your job?

Where do you spend your free time? Your money? What do you think about when you
have free time? Those areas of your life are where you start to realize your
idols.

## Idols

After defining idolatry and recognizing idols, the book examines common idols
that many people have in their lives.

### Happiness

Everyone wants to be happy. Exactly what being happy means is different for
everyone - after all everyone has different idols. But ultimately, everyone
wants to be happy.

Keller gives multiple eamples of how people idolize things with the ultimate
goal to be happy. People become workaholics because it makes them feel better
about their lives - how they are better than others. We spend hours at the gym
to be attractive, good looking, and thin. Being good looking gives us
confidence. We idolize about how we look, what other people think of us.

Keller concludes that all idols ultimately fall short of true happiness. If the
workaholic loses his job, or the attractive people gain weight, they are
devistated. Their self worth is depenedent on their idol.

### Sex and Love

Securlar society durns to sex and romance to give them a sense of meaning. It's
sad to say, but the porn industry is a $1 trillion, growing industry. Why?
People idolize sex. Love can become an idol too. Any person you put above God in
your life is an idol. Keller tells the story of Jacob from the Bible. Jacob
lusted after a woman named Rachel for her beauty. Ultimately, it ruined his
life.

### Money

Like other idols, money itself is not an idol. Anxiety and fear over money means
it's an idol in your life. Do you fear losing your job? Are you anxious about
the stock market falling? Does money give you comfort? Those are signs you have
made money an idol.

### Success

> Achievement is the alcohol of our time.

We live in an ultra competitive world. We need to work harder than ever before
to remain competitive. For some, the desire for success - to be the best - gives
them confidence and power. The more success we have, the more we want.

I personally struggle with this idol. Early in my career, I wanted to run my own
company. To be respected and have the ability to lead an engineering
organization. That drove me to work extremely hard. To take on multiple clients
and to control everything. I burned out and went thru a year of extreme
depression (coincidentally, it was 2009).

If you are tempted by power and success, even if you are not religious, look at
the life of Jesus. Jesus had the ultimate power. He raised people from the dead,
cured illness, and performed miracles. He had the power to do anything. Yet he
was a servant, a teacher. He sacrificed his life for the sins we commit.

Interestingly, today's most successful leaders are humble, show empathy, and
focus on doing good for humanity. They model Jesus. 2000 years ago Jesus showed
us the ultimate example of leadership. Studying Jesus, understanding how He
worked, how He thought, what He valued, how He treated people, will give you the
mindset and toolset for success.

### Power

> The way down is to go up, the way up is to go down. Always be humble.

A close cousin to success is power. We want to be in control of our lives, to
have power and influence. In the end, power gives you a false sense of security.
Power is fleeting. One day you have it, the next you could lose it.

What is interesting is that those in power tend to live in fear and anxiety
about it. They have more to lose. As you make more money in a company, or have
the power to influence large budgets or groups of people, you have a lot more
focus on your decisions. If you let it, you could end up in fear.

Power is not just a personal idol. It's also a cultural idol. Nations strive for
power. National pride can lead to prejudice. To believe you are "better" than
someone else. Pride leads to distruction, war, and a loss for humanity.

### Hidden idols

There are "hidden" idols in our lives that the book calls out.

Corporations idolize profits over people. It ultimately causes them ruin, but
they do it anyway. It causes them to be unethical and brutal to people.

Cultures have idols. Today's cultural idol is "self". America was founded under
the belief and fear of God. Over time, culture shifted from idolizing God to
idolizing the country itself. Today, we idolize individualism and being
"yourself".

Religion itself can be an idol. Religion can become toxic. People who think they
are "better" than others turn people off to religion. Some people focus their
lives around doing "church things" - being involved in small groups, leading
Bible studies, events, being involved in prayer teams, etc. You can make
religion itself an idol.

## Replacing your idols

You will always have an idol. I will always have an idol. We cannot expell
idols, we must replace them. We have to live for something in our lives. The
question is - what are we going to live for?

How do we identify our idols? Think about where you spend your time, money, and
attention.

* What occupies your mind when you have nothing to think about?
* What do you habitually think about which gives you comfort, confidence, and strength?
* Where do you spend your time and money?
* How do you act when prayers go unanswered?
* What are you the most afraid of? Your job? Losing others approval?

Keller concludes that true fulfillment can only come thru Jesus Christ. All
earthly idols will ultimately disappoint. It is God's love for us that He sent
Jesus to die for our sins.

Set your heart on Jesus. Put to death what belongs to your earthly nature -
sexual impurity, lust, evil desires and greed, which is idolatry. When we
rejoice in Jesus suffering for us, seeing what He did, we learn to hate sin.

Repenting is not enough - we must rejoice in Jesus. Repent and rejoice in Jesus.
You must transform your heart. If your heart is truly in Christ, you will have
peace and true freedom from counterfeit gods.

Be patient. Mature Christians keep growing closer to God, identifying and
replacing false idols. It's a lifelong journey.