# Book Review: Creative Selection: Inside Apple's Design Process During the Golden Age of Steve Jobs

[Image]

Creative Selection, written by long time Apple software engineer [Ken
Kocienda](https://twitter.com/kocienda), describes Apple's culture and
development process under Steve Jobs after his return to Apple thru the 2000s.
This was obviously one, if not the, most successful periods for any company in
history. Apple rolled out an astonishing series of product successes including
the iMac, iPod, iPhone, iPad, as well as software hits like Safari, iOS, and
macOS.

So much has been written on Apple's culture that many of the stories Ken tells
won't be new to the Apple follower. Steve Jobs was a perfectionist. Product
focused, intense, and at times mean. Apple was a secretive company, going to
great lengths to prevent even other Apple employees from knowing what select
teams were working on. There was a corporate struggle between Tony Fadell (iPod)
and Scott Forstall (Mac) towards which team and operating system should power
the iPhone.

Even if you know the history, or definitely if you don't, it is still an
excellent "in the trench" account of Apple. It weaves Apple's corporate values
with behind the scenes stories of how the software was built, how they dealt
with difficult problems, how they made decisions, the importance of demos to
product development, even and what it was like watching Steve rehearse for the
iPhone unveiling. Unless Jony Ive or Scott Forstall write books, you won't find
many people with as intimate knoweldge of Apple's inner workings during this
period than Ken Kocienda.


## Background

Kocienda's credibility around Apple product cluture comes from his deep history
of working with and around Apple and Apple employees. In 1999, [Andy
Hertzfeld](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Andy_Hertzfeld] and an all star cast
consisting of some of Silicon Valley's and Apple's best engineers started [Eazel
Software](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eazel). Eazel was a software company
which built tools on top of Linux's GNOME desktop. Ken worked for Eazel along
with many other key ex-Apple employees from the original 1984 Mac team.

While technically talented, the company failed a few years later in 2001 due to
the many challenges developing Linux desktop software. Small Linux desktop
market, wide variety of Linux  desktop environments, and cultural opposition to
corporate involvement to name a few. Ken was ultimately hired at Apple to work
on Safari with Don Melton - who he worked with at Eazel. Ken and Don were the
first two Safari engineers at Apple.

After Safari, Ken went to work on the iPhone. He wrote the original iPhone
keyboard, gestures, and other core iOS features.

## Creative Selection - Overview

Creative Selection is about Apple's product culture. While Apple obviously
creates technical products, this is *not* a book about technology. It's a
playbook describing the values, culture and mindset behind one, if not the,
world's most successful product company. Apple builds technical products, but
the lessons here apply to any company, period. You could be making paper, shoes,
food, toys, games, it doesn't matter. All product companies could stand to take
lessons from Apple.

If you read my blog often, you already know where I stand when it comes to
company culture. Culture is the single most important asset or liability a
company has. Steve knew that making great products was the sole focus of Apple.

Interestingly, after Steve Jobs died, Tim Cook claimed that Jobs' greatest
gift to humanity, his best "product", was Apple itself. The culture. The "DNA"
that makes up Apple. Culture is *everything* to a company.

You, like I initially, may be wondering what the term "Creative Selection"
actually means. It's the term Kocienda used to describe Apple's product culture.
Like Darwinian "Natural Selection", Apple's "Creative Selection" continually
refines it's product creation ethos, it's cultural drive to perfection over
time.

Kocienda describes Apple's "Creative Selection" as the interplay between several
core values. The core values of "Creative Selection" (and Apple) include:

* Inspiration
* Craft
* Collaboration
* Diligence
* Decisiveness
* Taste
* Empathy

After the inital backdrop of Apple's product culture, the book transitioned into
examples ranging from projects that Ken directly worked on, including Safari and
the iOS keyboard, to general stories about Apple. Including working with Steve
Jobs, Scott Forstall, ultimately shipping the iPhone. All the stories in the
book point back to Apple's core values.

While I thought the stories were generally interesting and described how they
ultimately tied back to Apple's core values, I thought Ken's vivid (sometimes a
bit over dramatic) description of Apple's culture was excellent. I felt like I
was actually in the meetings with Steve Jobs. I could feel the pre-meeting
tensions, the panic of not knowing how a demo will go, the satisfaction of a
demo gone well, and the frustration of a failed demo.

If you have ever been responsible for shipping something that's never been done
well before (like an on-screen virtual keyboard), you'll appreciate Ken's
stories about the early Safari and iOS teams. In both cases - getting a web
browser running on macOS and building a virtual keyboard - they had no idea if
or how they could get them to work. It's a true emotional roller coaster. Ken
did a great job of explaining the highs and lows that came with those projects.

He certainly painted Apple under a mostly positive light. He didn't try to make
Steve or Apple out to be perfect, but the tone felt a little overly positive
towards the company, people, and process. I have to imagine that the burnout and
pain that went on during the development of the iPhone was real. It had to have
been a demanding and brutal place to be at times. While there was *some* of that
discussed in the book, I feel like reality was probably more harsh than what was
mentioned in the book. It would have been interesting to have him address
the effects of Steve's and Apple's demanding side a bit more.

In all, the book does a great job with it's "behind the scenes" look into
Apple's product culture. Ken was in the trenches. Not working on some small side
project realated to iOS, but actually part of the core team. That experience
shines thru in the book in the form of vivid detail.

I'll walk thru the book in chapter order. Giving an overview of the demo along
with my thoughts as I was reading it.

## Demos

During the opening of the book, to draw the reader in, Ken describes a big
demo he had with Steve to show the iPhone keyboard. He used the demo to describe
Apple's demanding drive for perfection, it's mindset towards excellence and
attention to detail. As he describes, It was hard to work and please Steve.

The way Apple runs meetings is something all of us can learn from. Each meeting
had a decider. Meetings were kept efficient, minimal, and focused. You could
tell they were pragmatic and didn't waste time with a bunch of powerpoint, fake
demos or clutter. You couldn't pull the wool over Steve's eyes by doing "demo
tricks" - like spending all your time on one version of your software, then
throwing in a bunch of half-assed "alternatives" which make him want to choose
your one true attempt. He saw through that nonsense.

Decisions during demos were made around Apple's core values. Steve pushed for
simplicity and making tech simple for people to use. Apple has always been known
for making technology approachable - Ken's inside stories reinforce how core
those beliefs are enforced down to the meeting level.

I feel a lot of large company meetings are a waste of time. I liked Apple's
approach - a goal, a decider, and decisive decision making. While you're not
going to make all the right decisions (Steve as well), making a decision moves
projects along.

## Safari

After the initial attention grabbing demo chapter, we are brought back to the
history of Ken's involvement with Eazel and ultimately Apple and Safari.

Ken was brought into Apple to build Safari. They initially tried to base it on
Mozilla, since Don Melton worked for Mozilla, but they couldn't pull it off. The
mozilla codebase was too complex. Richard Williamson was hired and quickly stood
up a working version of KHTML running on the Mac, which ended up being their
basis for Safari. As part of the background to KHTML, he described Richard
Stallman, the FSF, and Apple's new found involvement with the GPL by virtue of
using KHTML, which was under the GPL license.

The decision to base Safari on KHTML was pragmatic and somewhat of a necessity
to get to market. Ken learned to move quick, cut your losses early, and that
knowing people (Richard Williamson) and relationships are more valuable than
engineering or trying to do everything yourself.

I found Apple's attitude toward OSS very telling. The KHTML decision showed that
Apple was willing to make pragmatic decisions and bend their own rules. Up until
this point they had not worked much with the OSS community. They had *some*
experience with OSS having released BSD / Mach based OS (Darwin) around the same
time (2000), but their culture had a very closed, prporietary mindset (which I
feel is loosening but still holds true today). They wanted to make Safari as
closed as possible but still complying with the GPL.

Getting Safari started was a difficult effort. Ken compared Apple's creativity
to Edison. Edison paid attention to small details and drew from the work of
others. Also that products often required 1% inspiration, 99% perspiration. I
feel that while Apple's products are generally done well out of the gate
(iPhone, Apple Watch, Air Pods, iOS), they do an excellent job of year on year
refinement. While new product (greenfield) development is hard. Consistent
improvement over time is much harder - it's the "99% perspiration" part. Apple
iterates well and Ken captured that when taking about Safari.

## Jobs Leadership

After describing the origins of Safari, Ken described Steve's singular goal, his
"single rule" for the Safari team: speed.

Ken compared Jobs focus on perfection to Vince Lombardi. Lombardi would focus on
a single play for 8 hours. Painstaking detail to the point of exacting
perfection. That was pure Jobs - as echoed in his Walter Isaacson biography and
other folklore from those who knew him.

I really feel this type of leadership and focus on excellence is missing in
leadership today. The mainstream engineering culture today is "quick, cheap,
good enough". I feel this level of perfection, while demanding, ultimately
inspires people. Call it Steve's "Reality Distortion Field" or simply
persuit of perfection, but I feel it inspires people to do great work. Steve
drove people, and Apple, to do their best work. We need more of that in software
today.

## More Apple Culture: The iOS Keyboard

During iPhone development, the team

The iPhone team iniitally had
a with keyboard accuracy and design. Like his discussion of Safari, the
keyboard project was simply used as a vehicle for Ken to describe Apple's
culture.

There were parts of this section that did get somewhat technical. For example,
autocorrect. Autocorrect is difficult to get right - it's more than simply a
list of words. They had to help autocorrect with a catalog of contemporary life
(people, places, and things), avoiding racial slurs, etc. Typing on a keyboard
is also tricky - users are not going to hit every key perfect. So balancing the
user's intent versus the actual keypress is an interesting problem they had to
solve.

Still, the vast majority of the iOS keyboard story was about the Apple culture
and process. The culture of perfection, being customer and product driven,
continually progressing between demo -> feedback -> collaboration -> iteration
-> demo -> repeat...

## Technology and Liberal Arts

The book finishes with a focus on technology and liberal arts, as well as the
iPhone release.

It's well known that Apple's goal is to make complex technology
human. To combine technology with liberal arts. Ken describes how they found
perfect touch target offsets that adjusted actual touch presses to account for
angle to make it touches more "accurate" from a user's point of view.

Ken summed up Apple's culture (and the entire book's thesis) well in this
chapter by re-defining "Creative Selection" as:

> “A small group of passionate, talented, imaginative, ingenious, ever-curious
> people built a work culture based on applying their inspiration and
> collaboration with diligence, craft, decisiveness, taste, and empathy and,
> through a lengthy progression of demo-feedback sessions, repeatedly tuned and
> optimized heuristics and algorithms, persisted through doubts and setbacks,
> selected the most promising bits of progress at every step, all with the goal
> of creating the best products possible.”

This paragraphy truly described the entire book well. It's almost like Ken,
after writing the entire book and now hitting the finish, crystalized the
"Creative Selection" vision he set out to write about. It's an amazing summary
of the entire book.

## Interesting Tidbits for the Apple Follower

If you are a die-hard Apple fan, as I am, most of this book will be reinforcing
themes about Apple culture you've read about. Still, there were a few things I
learned or were reminded about which I feel relfect Apple's culture today.

### OSS

This book was a reminder that Apple was, and still is, a very closed company.
Apple built Safari to control the web on Mac platforms. Similar to how they
build chips to control their silicon, or Metal to control 3D. It's no secret
that Apple wants to own and control their key dependencies. In fact, it's their
publicly advertised strategy and self described competitive advantage.

In regards to Safari and KHTML, Creative Selection reminds us they would not
have used GPL software with Safari if they could have avoided it. I feel like
that mindset is a microcosm of Apple's attitude toward OSS. Namely, that it's a
necessary evil. They must use OSS and contribute *some* OSS projects for
publicity reasons, but their true intention is to keep everthing closed.

I can hear your mind turning right now. What about Swift? What about LLVM? What
about WebKit? Clearly they represent the best of OSS at Apple. Let's take a look
at them one at a time.

First, WebKit. WebKit started off as a hugely popular piece of software,
powering Chrome and many other browsers. Today, WebKit and JSC are being
replaced with Chromium (blink / v8). That doesn't make WebKit *bad* technology
by any means, but it does make it less relevant in the industry. Certainly other
companies switching to Chromium, most notably Microsoft, feel Chromium is better
software than WebKit.

Next, let's take a look at LLVM and Swift.

LLVM was really "bought" by Apple when they hired Lattner. They've certainly
dedicated time and money to the project since, however it wasn't something that
Apple can really claim they created - like Google could claim with Kubernetes,
Tensorflow, Chromium, or Go - or Facebook could claim with React, PyTorch, or
GraphQL.

Swift is truly Apple's shining OSS star. The cynical person would say that it
wasn't really Apple's OSS culture that fostered the creation of Swift, it was
Lattner's sole dedication. That part I believe: that Swift *wouldn't* have come
out of Apple unless someone like Lattner just created it.

That said, Objective-C was a legacy language. Apple had to do *something* to
modernize their development tooling with or without Lattner. Swift *had* to be
developed or they would have had to adopt another language, like Google did with
Kotlin. Hanging on to Objective-C was untenable - developers have been jumping
ship to other platforms like the web, Electron, React Native, or Flutter. Apple
had to make it easier to develop for Apple platforms.

Still, Apple could have kept Swift closed. It would have been a massive mistake
in my opinion, given how literally all other languages are being open sourced,
however they could have. Instead, they dedicated the Swift core team to it and
are publicly behind Swift being OSS.

In all, I'm not heavily involved in Apple's OSS efforts. I hope reality within
Apple is different than how I feel about it. I have filed bugs against Swift and
am very impressed with the Swift community. That said, I still feel like OSS at
Apple is mostly self-serving and that Apple isn't sincere in it's OSS efforts. I
wish I didn't feel that way - I feel Apple's values and business practices are
much more ethical than Facebook, Amazon, or Google and would love to see them as
leaders in OSS. I just feel open drastically contradicts Apple's strong,
proprietary culture.

I really hope I'm wrong.

### Culture Change

In the epilogue, Ken acknowledges Apple's culture changed after Steve died:

> “After Steve died, the Apple software development culture started to change.
> As time passed and other coworkers came and went, the culture changed more. By
> my last day at Apple in 2017, few of the people I’ve mentioned in this book
> remained at the company, and more than anything, I missed collaborating with
> them as we had in the stories I’ve told. As I write, I still feel a strong
> bond to Apple, its products, and the people I worked with in more recent
> years, but it was time for me to move on.”

It's been widely rumored (and known) that Apple's culture has changed since
Steve died. Steve was a builder, a product visionary. Tim Cook is an operations
wizard. Tim is smart. He realizes that building great products must remain
Apple's north star, however operations are very different than product
development. You need a strong product visionary at the top making key product
decisions. I don't feel Apple has that today.

I don't know how culture has changed since Steve died, what Ken really thinks
about the culture change, or where Apple's culture is headed. I would love to
see a more open Apple culture especially in terms of platform support and open
source.

Perhaps the transition to services will push Apple to broaden support for
Android, the web, and other platforms. As an Apple shareholder, I would love to
see Apple open up their ecosystem to other platforms the way they opened up
iTunes to Windows to grow iPod over 15 years ago.

Services need scale and reach. Even with the most lucrative 15% of the global
market, I don't feel Apple services will be nearly as successful as they would
if they had access to the broader market. I don't feel people will switch
ecosystems for TV shows, "better" news, or exclusive games. Apple has Music on
Android, so it wouldn't be unprescedented if other services were expanded to
Android or Windows.

It will be interesting to see how the move to services changes Apple's culture.