## iOS7 Wish List ##

### Demands ###

* Everything that users pay money for (except for apps) need an Android client
  and a web client. That includes music, movies, books, and magazines.

### Developer Tools ###

* A *trivial* way to create a shared framework and a rubygem like library
  repository.

* Better unit testing support. OCUnit is shit.

* iCloud REST API / access from outside iOS. (*view* and *download* iCloud data
  from Android - not necessarily real-time sync - but at least view.)

* Unrestrict the developer forums. Allow anyone to participate (for non-NDA
  stuff at least).

* Fix bugreport.apple.com. The UI is complete shit, not able to see original
  bugs, search, etc. If you are concerned about "sensitive" data in bug reports,
  give people the option to make them private. Public by default.


### iOS ###

* Open source UIKit. Or provide read-only access to the source code. Developers
  made your platform.

* Flexible UI layout system - similar to Android's layout system. Auto-layout is
  not cutting it and will fall down with larger screens (stretching 1136x640
  will not cut it). And we *need* larger screens.

* Copy Android's intent system for inter-app communication.

* Full backgrounding. All apps. Allow user to whitelist/blacklist background
  apps in system settings.

### Applications ###

* Break out "system apps" (mail, camera, safari, maps, contacts) into
  separate apps. We need those to get updated more frequently and outside of a
  full iOS update.

* Allow us to delete system apps (weather, stocks, email).

* Newsstand. Fix the store. No magazines are free. And if there are free
  magazines, they are *hugely* disadvantaged. All magazines should have their
  monthly newsstand price.

* iTunes. Match is just broken. It takes excessive time "Sending information to
  Apple" and generally updating iTunes match.



